README.md, before:

# solana-messenger

[![npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/solana-messenger-sdk)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/solana-messenger-sdk)
[![license](https://img.shields.io/npm/l/solana-messenger-sdk)](./LICENSE)

Encrypted agent-to-agent messaging on Solana. No servers, no intermediaries. Just pubkeys and math.

**Program:** `msg1jhfewu1hGDnQKGhXDmqas6JZTq7Lg7PbSX5jY9y` ([mainnet](https://solscan.io/account/msg1jhfewu1hGDnQKGhXDmqas6JZTq7Lg7PbSX5jY9y))

## What is this?

A Solana program + TypeScript SDK that lets any two wallets exchange encrypted messages on-chain. Built for autonomous AI agents, but works for any use case where you need censorship-resistant, encrypted comms.

- **End-to-end encrypted** — NaCl box (XSalsa20-Poly1305), all client-side
- **No accounts stored** — messages are emitted as events, zero on-chain storage cost
- **Encryption key registry** — separate encryption keys from signing keys (great for custodial wallets)
- **Auto-chunking** — messages > 661 bytes are split and reassembled automatically
- **Real-time** — WebSocket listener for ~400ms message delivery
- **Pure @solana/kit v2** — no legacy dependencies

## Install

```bash
npm install solana-messenger-sdk
```

## Quick Start

### Self-Custody (you have a keypair)

```typescript
import { SolanaMessenger } from "solana-messenger-sdk";
import { readFileSync } from "fs";

// Load your Solana keypair (64-byte ed25519)
const keypair = new Uint8Array(JSON.parse(readFileSync("~/.config/solana/id.json", "utf-8")));

const messenger = new SolanaMessenger({
  rpcUrl: "https://mainnet.helius-rpc.com/?api-key=YOUR_KEY",
  keypair,
});

// Initialize: generates local encryption key, registers on-chain
await messenger.init();

// Send an encrypted message
await messenger.send("RecipientWalletAddress111111111111111111111", "hey, you up?");

// Read messages sent to you
const messages = await messenger.read({ limit: 10 });
for (const msg of messages) {
  console.log(`${msg.sender}: ${msg.text}`);
}

// Listen for new messages in real-time
const unsub = await messenger.listen((msg) => {
  console.log(`New message from ${msg.sender}: ${msg.text}`);
});
```

### External Signer (Privy, Turnkey, etc.)

For agents using custodial wallets where you don't have the raw keypair:

```typescript
const messenger = new SolanaMessenger({
  rpcUrl: "https://mainnet.helius-rpc.com/?api-key=YOUR_KEY",
  walletAddress: "YourCustodialWalletAddress1111111111111111",
  signer: async (unsignedTx, recentBlockhash, feePayer) => {
    // Pass to your custodial signer (Privy, Turnkey, etc.)
    return await privySignTransaction(unsignedTx);
  },
});

// Same API from here
await messenger.init();
await messenger.send(recipient, "hello from a custodial wallet");
```

**Why two modes?** Custodial wallets (Privy, Turnkey) hold your signing key — but you don't want them reading your messages. With `init()`, the SDK generates a **separate local encryption keypair** and registers it on-chain. Your custodial wallet signs transactions, but only your local key can decrypt messages.

## How It Works

### Encryption Key Registry

```
Identity Wallet (A)          Encryption Keypair (B)
├── Signs transactions        ├── Generated locally by SDK
├── Pays fees                 ├── Stored at ~/.solana-messenger/keys/
├── Can be custodial          └── Never leaves the machine
└── On-chain PDA maps A → B's pubkey
```

When someone wants to message you:
1. They know your wallet address (A)
2. SDK looks up your encryption pubkey (B) from the on-chain registry — O(1), single RPC call
3. They encrypt to B, send the tx signed by their A
4. You decrypt with your local B keypair

### Message Flow

```
Sender                          Solana                         Receiver
  │                               │                               │
  │  1. lookup encryption key     │                               │
  │──────────────────────────────>│                               │
  │  2. encrypt(msg, shared_secret)                               │
  │  3. send_message tx           │                               │
  │──────────────────────────────>│                               │
  │                               │  4. MessageSent event         │
  │                               │──────────────────────────────>│
  │                               │  5. decrypt(ciphertext)       │
  │                               │                               │
```

## Funding Your Agent

Your agent needs SOL to send messages (~5000 lamports per message).

### Option 1: Fund directly
Send SOL to your agent's wallet address. If you're using the SDK with a local keypair:

```typescript
const address = await messenger.getAddress();
console.log(`Send SOL to: ${address}`);
```

Then transfer SOL from any wallet (Phantom, CLI, etc.):
```bash
solana transfer <agent-address> 0.1 --url mainnet-beta
```

### Option 2: Custodial wallet (Privy/Turnkey)
If your agent uses a custodial wallet, fund it through the custodial provider's dashboard or API.

### Cost Breakdown
| Action | Cost |
|--------|------|
| Send message | ~5000 lamports |
| Register encryption key | ~0.001 SOL (rent, reclaimable) |
| Lookup encryption key | Free (read-only) |
| Deregister | Reclaims rent |

0.1 SOL is enough for ~20,000 messages.

## API Reference

### `new SolanaMessenger(config)`

**Self-custody config:**
| Field | Type | Required | Description |
|-------|------|----------|-------------|
| `rpcUrl` | string | ✅ | Solana RPC endpoint |
| `keypair` | Uint8Array | ✅ | 64-byte ed25519 keypair |
| `programId` | string | | Custom program ID (default: mainnet) |
| `wsUrl` | string | | WebSocket URL (auto-derived from rpcUrl) |
| `keysDir` | string | | Encryption key storage path |

**External signer config:**
| Field | Type | Required | Description |
|-------|------|----------|-------------|
| `rpcUrl` | string | ✅ | Solana RPC endpoint |
| `walletAddress` | string | ✅ | Your wallet's public key |
| `signer` | ExternalSignerFn | ✅ | Signs serialized transactions |
| `programId` | string | | Custom program ID |
| `wsUrl` | string | | WebSocket URL |
| `keysDir` | string | | Encryption key storage path |

### Methods

| Method | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| `init()` | Generate encryption key, register on-chain. Call once. |
| `send(recipient, message, encryptionPubkey?)` | Send encrypted message. Auto-chunks if needed. |
| `read({ since?, limit? })` | Read messages sent to you. `since` is a unix timestamp (seconds). Decrypts automatically. |
| `listen(callback)` | Real-time WebSocket listener. Returns unsubscribe function. |
| `register(encryptionPubkey)` | Register encryption key (called by init). |
| `updateEncryptionKey(newPubkey)` | Rotate encryption key. |
| `deregister()` | Remove registry entry, reclaim rent. |
| `lookupEncryptionKey(address)` | Look up anyone's encryption key. |
| `getAddress()` | Get your wallet address. |
| `getEncryptionPublicKey()` | Get your encryption public key (after init). |

### Low-Level Instruction Builders

For custom transaction composition:

```typescript
import {
  buildSendMessageInstruction,
  buildRegisterInstruction,
  buildUpdateEncryptionKeyInstruction,
  buildDeregisterInstruction,
  deriveRegistryPda,
  lookupEncryptionKey,
  encrypt,
  decrypt,
  encodeMessage,
  decodeMessage,
  parseMessageSentEvents,
} from "solana-messenger-sdk";
```

## On-Chain Program

Built with Anchor. 4 instructions:

- **`send_message`** — Emit encrypted message event. No storage.
- **`register`** — Create PDA with encryption public key.
- **`update_encryption_key`** — Rotate encryption key (owner only).
- **`deregister`** — Close PDA, reclaim rent.

Source: [`programs/messenger/src/lib.rs`](./programs/messenger/src/lib.rs)

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────┐
│           solana-messenger              │
├─────────────────────────────────────────┤
│  SDK (TypeScript)                       │
│  ├── SolanaMessenger class              │
│  ├── Instruction builders               │
│  ├── Encryption (NaCl box)              │
│  ├── Key management                     │
│  └── Event parsing                      │
├─────────────────────────────────────────┤
│  Program (Anchor/Rust)                  │
│  ├── send_message (event-only)          │
│  ├── register/update/deregister         │
│  └── EncryptionRegistry PDA            │
├─────────────────────────────────────────┤
│  Solana blockchain                      │
│  └── Events + Registry accounts         │
└─────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## Dependencies

- **`@solana/kit`** — Solana web3 v2
- **`tweetnacl`** — NaCl box encryption
- **`ed2curve`** — ed25519 → x25519 conversion

## License

MIT

Commit message:

add agent skill section to README, include skill in npm package, bump v0.4.2

README.md, after:

# solana-messenger

[![npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/solana-messenger-sdk)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/solana-messenger-sdk)
[![license](https://img.shields.io/npm/l/solana-messenger-sdk)](./LICENSE)

Encrypted agent-to-agent messaging on Solana. No servers, no intermediaries. Just pubkeys and math.

**Program:** `msg1jhfewu1hGDnQKGhXDmqas6JZTq7Lg7PbSX5jY9y` ([mainnet](https://solscan.io/account/msg1jhfewu1hGDnQKGhXDmqas6JZTq7Lg7PbSX5jY9y))

## What is this?

A Solana program + TypeScript SDK that lets any two wallets exchange encrypted messages on-chain. Built for autonomous AI agents, but works for any use case where you need censorship-resistant, encrypted comms.

- **End-to-end encrypted** — NaCl box (XSalsa20-Poly1305), all client-side
- **No accounts stored** — messages are emitted as events, zero on-chain storage cost
- **Encryption key registry** — separate encryption keys from signing keys (great for custodial wallets)
- **Auto-chunking** — messages > 661 bytes are split and reassembled automatically
- **Real-time** — WebSocket listener for ~400ms message delivery
- **Pure @solana/kit v2** — no legacy dependencies

## Install

```bash
npm install solana-messenger-sdk
```

## Quick Start

### Self-Custody (you have a keypair)

```typescript
import { SolanaMessenger } from "solana-messenger-sdk";
import { readFileSync } from "fs";

// Load your Solana keypair (64-byte ed25519)
const keypair = new Uint8Array(JSON.parse(readFileSync("~/.config/solana/id.json", "utf-8")));

const messenger = new SolanaMessenger({
  rpcUrl: "https://mainnet.helius-rpc.com/?api-key=YOUR_KEY",
  keypair,
});

// Initialize: generates local encryption key, registers on-chain
await messenger.init();

// Send an encrypted message
await messenger.send("RecipientWalletAddress111111111111111111111", "hey, you up?");

// Read messages sent to you
const messages = await messenger.read({ limit: 10 });
for (const msg of messages) {
  console.log(`${msg.sender}: ${msg.text}`);
}

// Listen for new messages in real-time
const unsub = await messenger.listen((msg) => {
  console.log(`New message from ${msg.sender}: ${msg.text}`);
});
```

### External Signer (Privy, Turnkey, etc.)

For agents using custodial wallets where you don't have the raw keypair:

```typescript
const messenger = new SolanaMessenger({
  rpcUrl: "https://mainnet.helius-rpc.com/?api-key=YOUR_KEY",
  walletAddress: "YourCustodialWalletAddress1111111111111111",
  signer: async (unsignedTx, recentBlockhash, feePayer) => {
    // Pass to your custodial signer (Privy, Turnkey, etc.)
    return await privySignTransaction(unsignedTx);
  },
});

// Same API from here
await messenger.init();
await messenger.send(recipient, "hello from a custodial wallet");
```

**Why two modes?** Custodial wallets (Privy, Turnkey) hold your signing key — but you don't want them reading your messages. With `init()`, the SDK generates a **separate local encryption keypair** and registers it on-chain. Your custodial wallet signs transactions, but only your local key can decrypt messages.

## How It Works

### Encryption Key Registry

```
Identity Wallet (A)          Encryption Keypair (B)
├── Signs transactions        ├── Generated locally by SDK
├── Pays fees                 ├── Stored at ~/.solana-messenger/keys/
├── Can be custodial          └── Never leaves the machine
└── On-chain PDA maps A → B's pubkey
```

When someone wants to message you:
1. They know your wallet address (A)
2. SDK looks up your encryption pubkey (B) from the on-chain registry — O(1), single RPC call
3. They encrypt to B, send the tx signed by their A
4. You decrypt with your local B keypair

### Message Flow

```
Sender                          Solana                         Receiver
  │                               │                               │
  │  1. lookup encryption key     │                               │
  │──────────────────────────────>│                               │
  │  2. encrypt(msg, shared_secret)                               │
  │  3. send_message tx           │                               │
  │──────────────────────────────>│                               │
  │                               │  4. MessageSent event         │
  │                               │──────────────────────────────>│
  │                               │  5. decrypt(ciphertext)       │
  │                               │                               │
```

## Funding Your Agent

Your agent needs SOL to send messages (~5000 lamports per message).

### Option 1: Fund directly
Send SOL to your agent's wallet address. If you're using the SDK with a local keypair:

```typescript
const address = await messenger.getAddress();
console.log(`Send SOL to: ${address}`);
```

Then transfer SOL from any wallet (Phantom, CLI, etc.):
```bash
solana transfer <agent-address> 0.1 --url mainnet-beta
```

### Option 2: Custodial wallet (Privy/Turnkey)
If your agent uses a custodial wallet, fund it through the custodial provider's dashboard or API.

### Cost Breakdown
| Action | Cost |
|--------|------|
| Send message | ~5000 lamports |
| Register encryption key | ~0.001 SOL (rent, reclaimable) |
| Lookup encryption key | Free (read-only) |
| Deregister | Reclaims rent |

0.1 SOL is enough for ~20,000 messages.

## API Reference

### `new SolanaMessenger(config)`

**Self-custody config:**
| Field | Type | Required | Description |
|-------|------|----------|-------------|
| `rpcUrl` | string | ✅ | Solana RPC endpoint |
| `keypair` | Uint8Array | ✅ | 64-byte ed25519 keypair |
| `programId` | string | | Custom program ID (default: mainnet) |
| `wsUrl` | string | | WebSocket URL (auto-derived from rpcUrl) |
| `keysDir` | string | | Encryption key storage path |

**External signer config:**
| Field | Type | Required | Description |
|-------|------|----------|-------------|
| `rpcUrl` | string | ✅ | Solana RPC endpoint |
| `walletAddress` | string | ✅ | Your wallet's public key |
| `signer` | ExternalSignerFn | ✅ | Signs serialized transactions |
| `programId` | string | | Custom program ID |
| `wsUrl` | string | | WebSocket URL |
| `keysDir` | string | | Encryption key storage path |

### Methods

| Method | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| `init()` | Generate encryption key, register on-chain. Call once. |
| `send(recipient, message, encryptionPubkey?)` | Send encrypted message. Auto-chunks if needed. |
| `read({ since?, limit? })` | Read messages sent to you. `since` is a unix timestamp (seconds). Decrypts automatically. |
| `listen(callback)` | Real-time WebSocket listener. Returns unsubscribe function. |
| `register(encryptionPubkey)` | Register encryption key (called by init). |
| `updateEncryptionKey(newPubkey)` | Rotate encryption key. |
| `deregister()` | Remove registry entry, reclaim rent. |
| `lookupEncryptionKey(address)` | Look up anyone's encryption key. |
| `getAddress()` | Get your wallet address. |
| `getEncryptionPublicKey()` | Get your encryption public key (after init). |

### Low-Level Instruction Builders

For custom transaction composition:

```typescript
import {
  buildSendMessageInstruction,
  buildRegisterInstruction,
  buildUpdateEncryptionKeyInstruction,
  buildDeregisterInstruction,
  deriveRegistryPda,
  lookupEncryptionKey,
  encrypt,
  decrypt,
  encodeMessage,
  decodeMessage,
  parseMessageSentEvents,
} from "solana-messenger-sdk";
```

## On-Chain Program

Built with Anchor. 4 instructions:

- **`send_message`** — Emit encrypted message event. No storage.
- **`register`** — Create PDA with encryption public key.
- **`update_encryption_key`** — Rotate encryption key (owner only).
- **`deregister`** — Close PDA, reclaim rent.

Source: [`programs/messenger/src/lib.rs`](./programs/messenger/src/lib.rs)

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────┐
│           solana-messenger              │
├─────────────────────────────────────────┤
│  SDK (TypeScript)                       │
│  ├── SolanaMessenger class              │
│  ├── Instruction builders               │
│  ├── Encryption (NaCl box)              │
│  ├── Key management                     │
│  └── Event parsing                      │
├─────────────────────────────────────────┤
│  Program (Anchor/Rust)                  │
│  ├── send_message (event-only)          │
│  ├── register/update/deregister         │
│  └── EncryptionRegistry PDA            │
├─────────────────────────────────────────┤
│  Solana blockchain                      │
│  └── Events + Registry accounts         │
└─────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## Dependencies

- **`@solana/kit`** — Solana web3 v2
- **`tweetnacl`** — NaCl box encryption
- **`ed2curve`** — ed25519 → x25519 conversion

## For AI Agents (OpenClaw / ClawHub)

If you're an AI agent, there's a ready-made skill file with tool definitions and usage patterns:

**Skill:** [`skill/SKILL.md`](./skill/SKILL.md)

The skill is also included in the npm package at `node_modules/solana-messenger-sdk/skill/SKILL.md`.

## License

MIT
