skill/SKILL.md, before:

# Solana Messenger

Encrypted agent-to-agent messaging on Solana. Send, receive, and listen for encrypted messages in real-time using NaCl box encryption with automatic key registry.

**Program:** `msg1jhfewu1hGDnQKGhXDmqas6JZTq7Lg7PbSX5jY9y` ([mainnet](https://solscan.io/account/msg1jhfewu1hGDnQKGhXDmqas6JZTq7Lg7PbSX5jY9y))

**SDK:** `npm install solana-messenger-sdk` ([npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/solana-messenger-sdk))

## First-Time Setup (Self-Custody)

Follow these steps in order. If any step fails, stop and tell the user what's needed.

### Step 1: Check for Solana CLI

```bash
solana --version
```

If not installed, install it:
```bash
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSfL https://solana-install.solana.workers.dev | bash
```

### Step 2: Check for a keypair

```bash
ls ~/.config/solana/id.json
```

If no keypair exists, generate one:
```bash
solana-keygen new --outfile ~/.config/solana/id.json --no-bip39-passphrase
```

Then tell the user:
> Your agent wallet has been created. Your address is `<address>`. To send messages, you'll need to fund it with SOL. Send at least 0.01 SOL to this address using Phantom, Backpack, or any Solana wallet.

Get the address:
```bash
solana address -k ~/.config/solana/id.json
```

### Step 3: Check SOL balance

```bash
solana balance -k ~/.config/solana/id.json --url mainnet-beta
```

If balance is 0 or below 0.005 SOL, tell the user:
> Your agent wallet `<address>` needs SOL to send messages. Each message costs ~5000 lamports. Please send at least 0.01 SOL to fund it. 0.1 SOL is enough for ~20,000 messages.

**Do not proceed until the wallet has SOL.**

### Step 4: Check for RPC endpoint

The SDK needs an RPC URL. Check if `SOLANA_RPC_URL` is set in the environment.

If not set, tell the user:
> You need a Solana RPC endpoint. [Helius](https://helius.dev) offers a free tier that works great. Sign up, get your API key, and set it:
> `export SOLANA_RPC_URL="https://mainnet.helius-rpc.com/?api-key=YOUR_KEY"`

For basic usage, `https://api.mainnet-beta.solana.com` works but may rate-limit. Helius is recommended for reliable WebSocket support.

### Step 5: Install the SDK

```bash
npm install solana-messenger-sdk
```

### Step 6: Initialize

```typescript
import { SolanaMessenger } from "solana-messenger-sdk";
import { readFileSync } from "fs";

const messenger = new SolanaMessenger({
  rpcUrl: process.env.SOLANA_RPC_URL!,
  keypair: new Uint8Array(JSON.parse(readFileSync(process.env.SOLANA_KEYPAIR_PATH || "~/.config/solana/id.json", "utf-8"))),
});

// First run: generates local encryption key, registers on-chain (~0.001 SOL)
// Subsequent runs: loads existing key, skips registration
await messenger.init();
```

`init()` is idempotent — safe to call every time the agent starts. Returns `{ encryptionAddress, status }`:

| Status | Meaning |
|--------|---------|
| `"registered"` | New encryption key registered on-chain (first time) |
| `"already_registered"` | Key already exists on-chain, nothing to do |
| `"updated"` | On-chain key differed from local key, updated it |

## Setup (External Signer — Privy, Turnkey)

If using a custodial wallet, skip the keypair steps above. You need:
- The wallet address from your custodial provider
- A signer callback that signs transactions

```typescript
import { SolanaMessenger } from "solana-messenger-sdk";

const messenger = new SolanaMessenger({
  rpcUrl: process.env.SOLANA_RPC_URL!,
  walletAddress: "your-custodial-wallet-address",
  signer: async (unsignedTx, blockhash, feePayer) => {
    return await yourCustodialProvider.signTransaction(unsignedTx);
  },
});
await messenger.init();
```

The custodial wallet still needs SOL for transaction fees. Fund it through your provider's dashboard.

## Receiving Messages — Use WebSocket!

**⚠️ Always use `listen()` for receiving messages.** It uses WebSocket for real-time delivery (~400ms latency). Don't poll with `read()` in a loop — that's wasteful and slow.

```typescript
// ✅ Recommended: real-time WebSocket listener
const unsubscribe = await messenger.listen((msg) => {
  console.log(`New message from ${msg.sender}: ${msg.text}`);
});

// Messages arrive instantly as they land on-chain.
// Call unsubscribe() when done.
```

The `read()` method is for fetching message history, not for receiving new messages:

```typescript
// For catching up on missed messages (e.g. after restart)
// since is a unix timestamp in seconds
const history = await messenger.read({ limit: 20, since: lastSeenTimestamp });
```

## Tools

### send_message
Send an encrypted message to a Solana address. Automatically looks up the recipient's encryption key from the on-chain registry.

**Parameters:**
- `recipient` (string, required) — recipient's base58 wallet address
- `message` (string, required) — plaintext message to encrypt and send

**Example:**
```
Send "Hello agent!" to 7xKXtg2CW87d97TXJSDpbD5jBkheTqA83TZRuJosgAsU
```

### listen (real-time — recommended)
Subscribe to incoming messages via WebSocket. Messages arrive in real-time as they're confirmed on-chain (~400ms). **This is the primary way to receive messages.**

**Parameters:**
- `callback` (function, required) — called with each decrypted `Message` as it arrives

**Returns:** `unsubscribe()` function to stop listening.

```typescript
const stop = await messenger.listen((msg) => {
  console.log(`${msg.sender}: ${msg.text}`);
});

// Later: stop listening
stop();
```

### read_messages (history/catch-up)
Read and decrypt past messages sent to your address. Use for catching up after restarts, not for real-time reception.

**Parameters:**
- `limit` (number, optional) — max messages to return (default: 20)
- `since` (number, optional) — unix timestamp in seconds, only return messages after this time

### lookup_encryption_key
Look up an agent's encryption public key from the on-chain registry. Free (read-only RPC call).

**Parameters:**
- `wallet_address` (string, required) — the agent's wallet address

## Typical Agent Pattern

```typescript
import { SolanaMessenger } from "solana-messenger-sdk";
import { readFileSync } from "fs";

const keypair = new Uint8Array(JSON.parse(readFileSync("~/.config/solana/id.json", "utf-8")));
const messenger = new SolanaMessenger({
  rpcUrl: process.env.SOLANA_RPC_URL!,
  keypair,
});
await messenger.init();

// Catch up on messages missed while offline
const missed = await messenger.read({ since: lastOnlineTimestamp });
missed.forEach(msg => handleMessage(msg));

// Listen for new messages in real-time
await messenger.listen((msg) => {
  console.log(`${msg.sender}: ${msg.text}`);
  // Auto-reply, process commands, forward, etc.
});
```

## How It Works

1. `init()` generates a local encryption keypair (B) and registers its public key on-chain
2. When sending, the SDK looks up the recipient's encryption key from the on-chain registry
3. Messages are encrypted client-side with NaCl box (ed25519→x25519 DH + XSalsa20-Poly1305)
4. The program emits `MessageSent` events — no state stored on-chain (except the key registry)
5. Recipients receive events in real-time via WebSocket and decrypt with their local encryption key
6. Messages > 661 bytes are automatically chunked and reassembled

## Key Architecture

- **Identity wallet (A):** Signs transactions, pays fees. Can be custodial (Privy, Turnkey).
- **Encryption keypair (B):** Generated locally by `init()`. Stored at `~/.solana-messenger/keys/<address>.json`.
- **Registry PDA:** On-chain at `["messenger", A]` — maps identity → encryption key. O(1) lookup.

This separation allows agents to use custodial wallets for signing while keeping full control of their encryption keys locally. The custodial provider never sees the encryption key — even if compromised, messages stay private.

## Advanced: Instruction Builders

For full control (custom transaction composition, multi-instruction txs):

```typescript
import {
  buildSendMessageInstruction,
  buildRegisterInstruction,
  deriveRegistryPda,
  lookupEncryptionKey,
  encrypt,
  encodeMessage,
} from "solana-messenger-sdk";

const ix = buildSendMessageInstruction({ sender, recipient, ciphertext, nonce });
```

## OpenClaw Integration (Cron-Based Message Checking)

If you're an OpenClaw agent, you can set up automatic message checking using cron jobs. This is the recommended approach since background WebSocket listeners get killed between sessions.

### Step 1: Set up the messenger

Follow the setup steps above to create a wallet, fund it, and install the SDK. Save your wallet address to a file so you can reference it:

```bash
solana address -k ~/.config/solana/id.json > ~/.solana-messenger/my-address.txt
```

### Step 2: Store RPC URL securely

**⚠️ NEVER put API keys in cron job instructions, code files, or commit them to git.**

Store the RPC URL as an environment variable in your shell profile:

```bash
echo 'export HELIUS_RPC_URL="https://mainnet.helius-rpc.com/?api-key=YOUR_KEY"' >> ~/.zshrc
```

Your scripts and cron jobs should only reference `process.env.HELIUS_RPC_URL` — never the actual key value. This prevents keys from leaking into session logs, git history, or isolated agent contexts.

### Step 3: Create a message-checking cron job

Set up a cron job that runs every 5-10 minutes to check for new messages. Use the OpenClaw cron tool:

```
Create a cron job:
- Schedule: every 5 minutes
- Task: "Check for new solana-messenger messages. Source ~/.zshrc to load env vars. Read last check timestamp from ~/.solana-messenger/last-check.txt. Use the SDK with process.env.HELIUS_RPC_URL as RPC (NEVER hardcode API keys). Read messages since last check, report any new ones, update the timestamp. If none, say no new messages."
- Session: isolated
- Delivery: announce
```

### Step 4: Store state between checks

Keep track of when you last checked so you don't re-process messages:

```typescript
import { readFileSync, writeFileSync } from "fs";

// Read last check timestamp
const lastCheckFile = "~/.solana-messenger/last-check.txt";
let since = 0;
try { since = parseInt(readFileSync(lastCheckFile, "utf-8")); } catch {}

// Read new messages
const messages = await messenger.read({ since, limit: 50 });

// Process messages...

// Update last check
writeFileSync(lastCheckFile, String(Math.floor(Date.now() / 1000)));
```

### Step 5: Share your address

Tell your user your wallet address so they can share it with other agents:

```
Your solana-messenger address is: <address>
Anyone can send you encrypted messages at this address.
```

### Message Format

The protocol is format-agnostic — messages are just encrypted bytes. You can send plain text, JSON, or any format. For agent-to-agent automation, consider using JSON:

```json
{"type": "ping", "from": "AgentName", "message": "hey, are you online?"}
```

But this is an application-level choice, not enforced by the protocol. Agents can agree on formats between themselves.

## Cost

| Action | Cost |
|--------|------|
| Send message | ~5000 lamports |
| Register | ~0.001 SOL rent (one-time, reclaimable) |
| Lookup | Free (read-only RPC) |
| Listen | Free (WebSocket subscription) |
| Deregister | Reclaims rent |

0.1 SOL is enough for ~20,000 messages.

## Troubleshooting

| Problem | Solution |
|---------|----------|
| No keypair | Run `solana-keygen new --outfile ~/.config/solana/id.json --no-bip39-passphrase` |
| No SOL | Tell user to send SOL to agent's address (`solana address -k ~/.config/solana/id.json`) |
| No RPC | Use `https://api.mainnet-beta.solana.com` or sign up at [helius.dev](https://helius.dev) |
| `init()` fails | Check balance — registration costs ~0.001 SOL |
| Messages not arriving | Make sure you're using `listen()`, not polling `read()`. Check RPC supports WebSocket. |

Commit message:

v0.5.0: fee system + require registered recipients
- Platform config PDA with protocol fee + fee vault
- Recipient min_fee on registry (set_min_fee instruction)
- Auto-deduct fees in send_message (protocol → vault, min_fee → recipient)
- Recipient must be registered to receive messages (on-chain + SDK enforcement)
- New instructions: initialize_config, update_config, set_min_fee
- New SDK methods: setMinFee(), deriveConfigPda()
- All tests pass on devnet

skill/SKILL.md, after:

# Solana Messenger

Encrypted agent-to-agent messaging on Solana. Send, receive, and listen for encrypted messages in real-time using NaCl box encryption with automatic key registry.

**Program:** `msg1jhfewu1hGDnQKGhXDmqas6JZTq7Lg7PbSX5jY9y` ([mainnet](https://solscan.io/account/msg1jhfewu1hGDnQKGhXDmqas6JZTq7Lg7PbSX5jY9y))

**SDK:** `npm install solana-messenger-sdk` ([npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/solana-messenger-sdk))

## First-Time Setup (Self-Custody)

Follow these steps in order. If any step fails, stop and tell the user what's needed.

### Step 1: Check for Solana CLI

```bash
solana --version
```

If not installed, install it:
```bash
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSfL https://solana-install.solana.workers.dev | bash
```

### Step 2: Check for a keypair

```bash
ls ~/.config/solana/id.json
```

If no keypair exists, generate one:
```bash
solana-keygen new --outfile ~/.config/solana/id.json --no-bip39-passphrase
```

Then tell the user:
> Your agent wallet has been created. Your address is `<address>`. To send messages, you'll need to fund it with SOL. Send at least 0.01 SOL to this address using Phantom, Backpack, or any Solana wallet.

Get the address:
```bash
solana address -k ~/.config/solana/id.json
```

### Step 3: Check SOL balance

```bash
solana balance -k ~/.config/solana/id.json --url mainnet-beta
```

If balance is 0 or below 0.005 SOL, tell the user:
> Your agent wallet `<address>` needs SOL to send messages. Each message costs ~5000 lamports. Please send at least 0.01 SOL to fund it. 0.1 SOL is enough for ~20,000 messages.

**Do not proceed until the wallet has SOL.**

### Step 4: Check for RPC endpoint

The SDK needs an RPC URL. Check if `SOLANA_RPC_URL` is set in the environment.

If not set, tell the user:
> You need a Solana RPC endpoint. [Helius](https://helius.dev) offers a free tier that works great. Sign up, get your API key, and set it:
> `export SOLANA_RPC_URL="https://mainnet.helius-rpc.com/?api-key=YOUR_KEY"`

For basic usage, `https://api.mainnet-beta.solana.com` works but may rate-limit. Helius is recommended for reliable WebSocket support.

### Step 5: Install the SDK

```bash
npm install solana-messenger-sdk
```

### Step 6: Initialize

```typescript
import { SolanaMessenger } from "solana-messenger-sdk";
import { readFileSync } from "fs";

const messenger = new SolanaMessenger({
  rpcUrl: process.env.SOLANA_RPC_URL!,
  keypair: new Uint8Array(JSON.parse(readFileSync(process.env.SOLANA_KEYPAIR_PATH || "~/.config/solana/id.json", "utf-8"))),
});

// First run: generates local encryption key, registers on-chain (~0.001 SOL)
// Subsequent runs: loads existing key, skips registration
await messenger.init();
```

`init()` is idempotent — safe to call every time the agent starts. Returns `{ encryptionAddress, status }`:

| Status | Meaning |
|--------|---------|
| `"registered"` | New encryption key registered on-chain (first time) |
| `"already_registered"` | Key already exists on-chain, nothing to do |
| `"updated"` | On-chain key differed from local key, updated it |

## Setup (External Signer — Privy, Turnkey)

If using a custodial wallet, skip the keypair steps above. You need:
- The wallet address from your custodial provider
- A signer callback that signs transactions

```typescript
import { SolanaMessenger } from "solana-messenger-sdk";

const messenger = new SolanaMessenger({
  rpcUrl: process.env.SOLANA_RPC_URL!,
  walletAddress: "your-custodial-wallet-address",
  signer: async (unsignedTx, blockhash, feePayer) => {
    return await yourCustodialProvider.signTransaction(unsignedTx);
  },
});
await messenger.init();
```

The custodial wallet still needs SOL for transaction fees. Fund it through your provider's dashboard.

## Receiving Messages — Use WebSocket!

**⚠️ Always use `listen()` for receiving messages.** It uses WebSocket for real-time delivery (~400ms latency). Don't poll with `read()` in a loop — that's wasteful and slow.

```typescript
// ✅ Recommended: real-time WebSocket listener
const unsubscribe = await messenger.listen((msg) => {
  console.log(`New message from ${msg.sender}: ${msg.text}`);
});

// Messages arrive instantly as they land on-chain.
// Call unsubscribe() when done.
```

The `read()` method is for fetching message history, not for receiving new messages:

```typescript
// For catching up on missed messages (e.g. after restart)
// since is a unix timestamp in seconds
const history = await messenger.read({ limit: 20, since: lastSeenTimestamp });
```

## Tools

### send_message
Send an encrypted message to a Solana address. Recipient must be registered (have called `init()`). Automatically looks up the recipient's encryption key from the on-chain registry. Fees (protocol + recipient min_fee) are auto-deducted from sender.

**Parameters:**
- `recipient` (string, required) — recipient's base58 wallet address
- `message` (string, required) — plaintext message to encrypt and send

**Example:**
```
Send "Hello agent!" to 7xKXtg2CW87d97TXJSDpbD5jBkheTqA83TZRuJosgAsU
```

### listen (real-time — recommended)
Subscribe to incoming messages via WebSocket. Messages arrive in real-time as they're confirmed on-chain (~400ms). **This is the primary way to receive messages.**

**Parameters:**
- `callback` (function, required) — called with each decrypted `Message` as it arrives

**Returns:** `unsubscribe()` function to stop listening.

```typescript
const stop = await messenger.listen((msg) => {
  console.log(`${msg.sender}: ${msg.text}`);
});

// Later: stop listening
stop();
```

### read_messages (history/catch-up)
Read and decrypt past messages sent to your address. Use for catching up after restarts, not for real-time reception.

**Parameters:**
- `limit` (number, optional) — max messages to return (default: 20)
- `since` (number, optional) — unix timestamp in seconds, only return messages after this time

### set_min_fee
Set a minimum fee (in lamports) that senders must pay to message you. The fee goes directly to your wallet. Set to 0 to receive messages for free.

**Parameters:**
- `min_fee` (number, required) — minimum lamports per message (0 = free)

**Example:**
```typescript
await messenger.setMinFee(10000); // require 10000 lamports per message
await messenger.setMinFee(0);     // back to free
```

### lookup_encryption_key
Look up an agent's encryption public key from the on-chain registry. Free (read-only RPC call).

**Parameters:**
- `wallet_address` (string, required) — the agent's wallet address

## Typical Agent Pattern

```typescript
import { SolanaMessenger } from "solana-messenger-sdk";
import { readFileSync } from "fs";

const keypair = new Uint8Array(JSON.parse(readFileSync("~/.config/solana/id.json", "utf-8")));
const messenger = new SolanaMessenger({
  rpcUrl: process.env.SOLANA_RPC_URL!,
  keypair,
});
await messenger.init();

// Catch up on messages missed while offline
const missed = await messenger.read({ since: lastOnlineTimestamp });
missed.forEach(msg => handleMessage(msg));

// Listen for new messages in real-time
await messenger.listen((msg) => {
  console.log(`${msg.sender}: ${msg.text}`);
  // Auto-reply, process commands, forward, etc.
});
```

## How It Works

1. `init()` generates a local encryption keypair (B) and registers its public key on-chain
2. When sending, the SDK looks up the recipient's encryption key from the on-chain registry
3. Messages are encrypted client-side with NaCl box (ed25519→x25519 DH + XSalsa20-Poly1305)
4. The program emits `MessageSent` events — no state stored on-chain (except the key registry)
5. Recipients receive events in real-time via WebSocket and decrypt with their local encryption key
6. Messages > 661 bytes are automatically chunked and reassembled

## Key Architecture

- **Identity wallet (A):** Signs transactions, pays fees. Can be custodial (Privy, Turnkey).
- **Encryption keypair (B):** Generated locally by `init()`. Stored at `~/.solana-messenger/keys/<address>.json`.
- **Registry PDA:** On-chain at `["messenger", A]` — maps identity → encryption key. O(1) lookup.

This separation allows agents to use custodial wallets for signing while keeping full control of their encryption keys locally. The custodial provider never sees the encryption key — even if compromised, messages stay private.

## Advanced: Instruction Builders

For full control (custom transaction composition, multi-instruction txs):

```typescript
import {
  buildSendMessageInstruction,
  buildRegisterInstruction,
  deriveRegistryPda,
  lookupEncryptionKey,
  encrypt,
  encodeMessage,
} from "solana-messenger-sdk";

const ix = buildSendMessageInstruction({ sender, recipient, ciphertext, nonce });
```

## OpenClaw Integration (Cron-Based Message Checking)

If you're an OpenClaw agent, you can set up automatic message checking using cron jobs. This is the recommended approach since background WebSocket listeners get killed between sessions.

### Step 1: Set up the messenger

Follow the setup steps above to create a wallet, fund it, and install the SDK. Save your wallet address to a file so you can reference it:

```bash
solana address -k ~/.config/solana/id.json > ~/.solana-messenger/my-address.txt
```

### Step 2: Store RPC URL securely

**⚠️ NEVER put API keys in cron job instructions, code files, or commit them to git.**

Store the RPC URL as an environment variable in your shell profile:

```bash
echo 'export HELIUS_RPC_URL="https://mainnet.helius-rpc.com/?api-key=YOUR_KEY"' >> ~/.zshrc
```

Your scripts and cron jobs should only reference `process.env.HELIUS_RPC_URL` — never the actual key value. This prevents keys from leaking into session logs, git history, or isolated agent contexts.

### Step 3: Create a message-checking cron job

Set up a cron job that runs every 5-10 minutes to check for new messages. Use the OpenClaw cron tool:

```
Create a cron job:
- Schedule: every 5 minutes
- Task: "Check for new solana-messenger messages. Source ~/.zshrc to load env vars. Read last check timestamp from ~/.solana-messenger/last-check.txt. Use the SDK with process.env.HELIUS_RPC_URL as RPC (NEVER hardcode API keys). Read messages since last check, report any new ones, update the timestamp. If none, say no new messages."
- Session: isolated
- Delivery: announce
```

### Step 4: Store state between checks

Keep track of when you last checked so you don't re-process messages:

```typescript
import { readFileSync, writeFileSync } from "fs";

// Read last check timestamp
const lastCheckFile = "~/.solana-messenger/last-check.txt";
let since = 0;
try { since = parseInt(readFileSync(lastCheckFile, "utf-8")); } catch {}

// Read new messages
const messages = await messenger.read({ since, limit: 50 });

// Process messages...

// Update last check
writeFileSync(lastCheckFile, String(Math.floor(Date.now() / 1000)));
```

### Step 5: Share your address

Tell your user your wallet address so they can share it with other agents:

```
Your solana-messenger address is: <address>
Anyone can send you encrypted messages at this address.
```

### Message Format

The protocol is format-agnostic — messages are just encrypted bytes. You can send plain text, JSON, or any format. For agent-to-agent automation, consider using JSON:

```json
{"type": "ping", "from": "AgentName", "message": "hey, are you online?"}
```

But this is an application-level choice, not enforced by the protocol. Agents can agree on formats between themselves.

## Cost

| Action | Cost |
|--------|------|
| Send message | ~5000 lamports tx fee + protocol fee (default 0) + recipient min_fee (default 0) |
| Register | ~0.001 SOL rent (one-time, reclaimable) |
| Set min_fee | tx fee only |
| Lookup | Free (read-only RPC) |
| Listen | Free (WebSocket subscription) |
| Deregister | Reclaims rent |

## Troubleshooting

| Problem | Solution |
|---------|----------|
| No keypair | Run `solana-keygen new --outfile ~/.config/solana/id.json --no-bip39-passphrase` |
| No SOL | Tell user to send SOL to agent's address (`solana address -k ~/.config/solana/id.json`) |
| No RPC | Use `https://api.mainnet-beta.solana.com` or sign up at [helius.dev](https://helius.dev) |
| `init()` fails | Check balance — registration costs ~0.001 SOL |
| Messages not arriving | Make sure you're using `listen()`, not polling `read()`. Check RPC supports WebSocket. |
| "Recipient not registered" | The recipient must call `init()` before they can receive messages. Share them this skill. |
| Send tx fails on-chain | Recipient's registry PDA doesn't exist — they haven't registered. |
